[SOFT MUSIC]
[GENTLE MUSIC]
[HEART THUMPING]
>>EDWARD GROUP: For years,
we've heard the following.
A low salt diet is healthy.
There's no difference between
table salt and sea salt.
Refined salt is
healthier for you.
Low salt products
are better for you.
These statements
are believed to be
true by not only laypeople
but also most physicians
when, in actuality, these
statements are false.
On today's special episode of
"Healing Matrix," Dr. David
Brownstein, the author of
"Salt Your Way to Health,"
joins us to explain why
these so-called facts are not
only incorrect, but
that without salt, life
itself would not be possible.
Plus, later on in the show,
we discuss the importance
of supplements like B12, ozone
therapy, and other elements
of a holistic plan.
So let's dive in.
Thank you, Dr. Brownstein,
for joining us today.
>>DAVID BROWNSTEIN:
Thank you for having me.
>>EDWARD: So everybody's
been so misinformed.
What is the truth about salt?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
in medical school,
I was taught no one
should have salt.
There's enough salt in food.
And if you have
salt, you're going
to get blood pressure
problems from salt.
And once I started actually
looking at patients
holistically, I found
the vast majority of them
are actually deficient
in salt, and salt
is a major constituent in the
body we can't live without.
So I am all the time
telling my patients
to up their salt levels and
to use the right kind of salt.
>>EDWARD: So how did
all this knowledge
of salt all of a sudden
go out the window
and it went from being
good to being bad?
>>BROWNSTEIN: This goes
back about a hundred years
when researchers were
investigating how salt
interacts with blood pressure.
And they gave rats
huge amounts of salt
that we would never ingest
in equivalent amounts.
And what they found was the
blood pressure of these animals
went up very high.
So that's where the salt equals
blood pressure problems came
out.
And from that time, there was
a push in the medical world
to keep salt levels low so
people's blood pressures didn't
go up.
>>EDWARD: So what exactly is the
difference between refined salt
versus unrefined salt?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, salt is
the second major constituent
in our body next to water.
So we need adequate amounts
of salt at all times
to maintain optimal energy
production and optimal
function of ourselves.
So when we're salt
deficient, our cells
aren't going to function
well, and we're not
going to have enough energy.
And we can get salt one
of two ways-- refined
salt or unrefined
salt. Now refined
salt we're all familiar with.
That's the little
thin white crystals
seen in all the
restaurants, and they pour
through the small little holes.
And unrefined salt is larger,
and it's got some color to it.
The color and the larger
size is due to the minerals
that are in salt.
All salt has minerals in it.
And it depends if the salt
manufacturing companies
are going to refine it or not.
When they refine it,
they remove the minerals,
and they refer to those
minerals as impurities.
And they bleach it white, and
they call that refined salt.
I call that a unhealthy
salt. That's sodium
and chloride with some
toxic chemicals in it,
such as ferrocyanide
and aluminum silicate.
Unrefined salt is
a better choice.
It's got a full complement
of minerals in it,
and it doesn't have
toxic additives to it.
>>EDWARD: Why do you think
they're refining salt?
It seems like you
can get natural salt
with the minerals in it.
It seems like you're just
taking all kinds of extra steps,
and it's costing you more
money and time to refine it.
What's the purpose behind that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
one of the purposes--
like, they refine everything
because it lasts forever.
And it can stay on
the shelves forever.
There's no expiration date
of any refined product.
And the other thing is the
salt manufacturers have--
they think that we think it's
a pure substance because it's
white and there's
no color to it.
Well, I tell my patients
avoid the white salt
and get the salt that has
some color to it because that
means it has minerals in it.
>>EDWARD: What about the
iodine added to refined salt?
Are they still doing that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Oh,
they're still doing that.
That was done in the early
1920s to help cure the goiter
epidemic that was occurring
in the midwestern United
States around the Great Lakes.
And when the government
found that most of the people
were deficient in
iodine, they had
to find a way to get
iodine in for a population.
And so salt is one of the ways.
You can put iodine into refined
salt, and you get iodized salt.
And that was an effective
public health miracle
back then because it
cured the goiter epidemic.
However, it caused people to
have more mineral deficiencies
and imbalances because
we took the minerals out
of that refined salt.
>>EDWARD: So talk about what
happens when we consume sodium.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, we need
over a hundred grams of sodium
at any one time in our body.
Similarly, we need over a
hundred grams of chloride
at any one time in our body.
So what happens when
we consume sodium?
It's used for hundreds
of different reactions.
It's used to make energy
molecules in the body.
It's used to transport iodine
into the cells of the body.
We need sodium to survive.
Our cells need
sodium to survive,
and they need a fair amount
of sodium to survive.
We have no stores of
salt. We have no stores
of sodium nor chloride.
If we don't get adequate
amounts in, we'll be deficient.
And I can tell you
from testing thousands
of people over many years, most
people are deficient in salt.
>>EDWARD: The unrefined
salt, I'm a big fan.
It contains so many of
the life-giving minerals.
What are some of those minerals?
And how many minerals do you
look for in unrefined salt?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
unrefined salt
has over 80 minerals in it.
And these minerals are
all needed by our body.
And magnesium-- there's zinc.
There is boron.
There's over 80 essential
minerals in that substance
that we need.
Refined salt has
no minerals in it.
It's got sodium and chloride
with some toxic additives
to it as well and iodine
synthetically added to it.
Now the iodine in refined
salt is not a great way
to get iodine in the body.
Studies have shown
only about 10%
of the iodine in refined
salt is absorbed.
So it's not a great way
to put iodine in a body.
If we were going to do iodine,
like you and I talked about
in the other episodes,
we should take it orally
as a separate supplement.
>>EDWARD: I'm thinking about
salt, and pH comes to mind.
And the individuals that are
using refined versus unrefined,
have you noticed any
differences in pH changes?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Absolutely.
So my daughter, Jessica, in
her sixth grade science project
was developing her
own science project.
And she had known about my
work with iodine and salt.
And she designed a
whole science project
to look at the pH difference
between refined and unrefined
salt.
So she put a certain amount
in two glasses of water,
and we measured the pH.
And what we found
was the refined salt
acidified the water product.
And the unrefined salt
alkalinized and normalized it,
raised the pH of it.
So when we eat poor foods
and refined foods and foods
that are unhealthy for
us, they usually acidify,
and they lower pH.
When we eat
healthier foods, they
raise our pH to more healthy
pH and alkalinize us.
>>EDWARD: So how can a low
salt diet raise blood pressure?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, if you
recall from our doctor school
training, when we
lower the salt intake,
the kidney and adrenal glands
have compensatory hormones
they release, such as
renin and aldosterone,
that go up because
the body needs
salt. Every cell in
the body needs salt.
So it's a crucial substance.
There's all these
hormones that are
geared towards
maintaining adequate salt
levels in our body.
So if we lower our salt intake,
these compensatory hormones
go up to try and help us
absorb more salt from our diet.
And they constrict
the blood vessels.
So it raises blood pressure
because our fluid levels
will go down as the body tries
to hold on to salt that it has.
So as conventional medicine
doctors, what do we do with it?
We give them anti-renin and
anti-aldosterone hormones,
which are commonly
prescribed today
as blood pressure medicines.
So for many blood pressure
patients, I put them on salt
and see their blood
pressure come down.
And they're able to come
off their ACE inhibitors
and aldosterone drugs
that they're taking.
>>EDWARD: Have you seen
changes in hormone levels
with unrefined versus
refined salt intake?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Absolutely.
So unrefined salt supplies all
those minerals for the body.
It makes the body healthier.
Refined salt just has
sodium and chloride.
It drops the pH, makes
the body more acidic.
That stresses the body, and you
get all these stress hormones
being produced.
And we don't like
to be in stress
and have stress hormones
because it gives us
anxiety and fatigue.
So there's a big difference
between unrefined
and refined salt hormonally.
>>EDWARD: What are the
benefits of magnesium
in unrefined salts?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
magnesium is a mineral
that we need huge amounts of.
We don't have
stores of magnesium.
So we need to get it
in on a daily basis
to maintain optimal
magnesium levels.
Magnesium's used in hundreds
of different reactions
in the body, including making
our energy source, ATP.
So magnesium is one of the
constituents in unrefined salt.
It's not in refined salt. I
check red blood cell magnesium
levels in every
patient that I see.
And I find magnesium levels low
in a large amount of people,
about 50% of people out there.
And one of the ways you can get
it in is using unrefined salt.
It's a good source and an
absorbable source of magnesium.
>>EDWARD: So how
much unrefined salt
should someone consume
on a regular basis,
on a daily basis?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Assuming
someone doesn't
have kidney failure or severe
congestive heart failure,
most people need at least a
teaspoon of unrefined salt
beyond what's already in food.
If you sweat a lot,
if you work out
a lot, if you're highly
active, if you're
a nervous, busy person, they
generally will need more salt.
So somewhere between a
teaspoon and two teaspoons
for most people is enough.
If they really work
out a lot, they
might need three,
four teaspoons a day.
But one of the markers
that people can go by
is if you're getting leg and
foot cramps or cramps anywhere
else in the body,
you need more salt
until those cramps go away.
>>EDWARD: If they're
taking iodine,
should they take that
same amount of salt?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So iodine,
as we talked about
in the other episodes,
can cause the body
to release these toxic
halites that are so
ubiquitous in our environment.
The halite family consists
of iodine, fluoride, bromide,
and chloride.
Now chloride is part of salt.
In the early 20th
century, there was
a lot of medicines
that had bromide in it,
such as Bromo-Seltzer, and
there were many others.
Today, there's
still some medicines
that have bromide in it, such
as antidepressant medications.
And we can still see
bromide toxicity today.
But in the old days when there
was more bromide being used,
people would get bromide toxic.
So one of the ways
conventional medicine helped
the body get rid of bromide
when these people would show up
in emergency rooms
with hallucinations
and mental distress is they
would salt the bromide out.
They would give them
IVs of salt water.
So it's called salting
the bromide out.
So when I put
patients on iodine,
I know they're going to
release bromide and fluoride,
and they have to get
it out of their body.
So they don't get sick releasing
those larger amounts of bromide
and fluoride, I have them
use salt, about a teaspoon
or two a day with it.
If somebody reacts to iodine
from taking it as a supplement
and they get--
such as a detox reaction,
they don't feel good with it,
I always tell them stop
the iodine for a week.
Take two teaspoons
of salt a day.
Make sure you have
good hydration.
You drink half your body
weight in water in ounces.
And then try the
iodine a week later.
The vast majority can take it
without problems at that point.
>>EDWARD: So if someone was
taking iodine and unrefined
salt, would you recommend
they put the unrefined salt
on their food?
Or should they take
it with the iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: A teaspoon of
unrefined salt on your food
is going to be a little much.
So what I tell people to do, I
don't care how you get it in.
You can eat it.
Put it on your food.
You can put it in your water.
I put it in my water bottles.
I don't taste it.
It's an acquired taste,
takes a couple of days
to get used to it.
Then you don't taste it.
But however they
want to get it in.
They don't necessarily have to
take it the same time as iodine
during the day, but the
same time period, they
should be taking
salt with iodine.
>>EDWARD: It almost
sounds like Big Pharma
and the conventional
medicine conglomerate
has purposely instigated
this whole salt dilemma.
It almost reminds me
of if you have a fever,
take something to
reduce your fever
and not let your body naturally
take care of whatever it
needs to take care of.
I mean, do you think
there's some sort
of conspiratorial
thing going on here?
I mean, think about it.
If you're taking
in unrefined salt
or now they're saying everybody
needs to be on a low salt diet,
I mean, that would contribute
to or could contribute
to a lot of the
chronic illnesses
and a lot of the
degenerative diseases
that we may be
suffering from today.
And people believe it.
>>BROWNSTEIN: I don't
think most doctors are
part of that conspiracy theory.
I think most doctors
don't know about salt,
and they remember
what we learned
in medical school,
which was probably
about one minute on salt,
that a low salt diet's better
and salt causes blood
pressure problems.
So in that sense, I don't think
there's a conspiracy theory.
I think there's more
ignorance in that sense.
But I think if
doctors can learn--
look at physiology and
look at biochemistry
and go back and look at
the biochemical pathways
and think about what a low salt
diet will do to the hormone
production from the
kidneys and the adrenals,
they'll come to the
realization that we
don't need a low salt diet.
It's just going to raise
blood pressure and cause
doctors to start prescribing
angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACE inhibitors and
anti-aldosterone medications
and anti-renin medications,
which are the most common blood
pressure medications
being prescribed today.
>>EDWARD: So what is the best
type of unrefined salt people
can get?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So I've tested
Celtic's brand sea salt
from Selina's, I've tested
Redmond's real salt,
and I've tested Himalayan
salt four times each.
They've all tested
clean from toxins.
They've all had good
mineral content.
So I tell patients, whatever
tastes better on your food,
you could use that
type of salt for it.
>>EDWARD: You
mentioned water intake.
And I'm really big
about water intake
because most people don't
even drink water anymore.
They're drinking coffee.
They're drinking tea.
They're drinking energy drinks.
And some people even
say, I don't drink water
because it doesn't taste good.
So how does that come into play
when you're putting somebody
on unrefined salt?
And couldn't unrefined salt
actually help with dehydration?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So our
body's 70% water.
Our brain is 80% water.
If we don't take in
adequate amounts of water,
we're not camels.
We don't store water.
We'll be dehydrated.
And unfortunately,
people generally
don't take in enough water.
They're drinking other things.
They're drinking juice
with too much sugar in it,
which acts as a diuretic
and pulls water out of you.
They're drinking now
these large coffees.
And a cup of coffee
today is much different
than a cup of coffee
10, 15 years ago was.
It's much larger in size.
So the caffeine can
pull water out of you
and make you dehydrated.
And the coffee can
be worsened if you're
putting a lot of sugar in it
and further dehydrating things.
So I do think people are
more dehydrated today
than they were in the past.
And one of the
first things I ask
my patients in the
initial history
is, how much water do you drink?
And I ask, what
else do you drink?
And I go through
the list of coffee,
soda, tea and what they're
putting in these things.
And I encourage them to
take their weight in pounds,
divide by two, and drink that
many ounces of water a day
as a minimum.
Again, if they're
exercising or they're busy,
they'll need more water.
Now salt and water
go hand in hand
here because the body
can't hold on to the water
if there's not enough
salt. It's all the water.
And so you definitely need
salt to hold that water in.
And they definitely
need enough water
just to hydrate their body.
So I call this the basics.
This is just doing the basics
with people is water and salt.
>>EDWARD: I mean, if
you think about it,
salt is like one of the
most inexpensive treatment
modalities out there.
It's amazing.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Unrefined salt
doesn't cost much money either.
And it's so much
healthier for the body.
But it's a very cheap
good thing to have.
>>EDWARD: Have you seen
prescription medications
that people are taking
interact with the salt
balance within the system?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, the
problem is the blood pressure
medicines, the diuretics.
And they cause the body
to release minerals,
and they release salt.
And that's how they work.
So they deplete
the body of salt.
And it does lower the blood
pressure because everything
lowers down with that.
But it's just blocking
the hormonal releases.
It's not the right
thing to do with people.
Many times they need
salt unless they
have severe congestive heart
failure or renal failure,
kidney failure.
>>EDWARD: Have you
had a dramatic case
that you could talk
about briefly of somebody
who was very salt deficient and
then completely changed around?
Because I know you do a
holistic approach as well.
But something you can
pinpoint it was the salt.
>>BROWNSTEIN: So I
have a patient, Bob,
who's 89 years old.
This man is in great shape.
He works out like a fiend.
He's built. And
I always tell him
he looks like he's 30 to 40
years younger than his age.
And he came to see me
last week with anxiety.
And his daughter was
with him, and she said,
well, we took him to the
urgent care last night,
and they told him
nothing was wrong.
I said, did they
draw blood work?
And she said, yeah.
So she's fishing in her purse.
And I said to him, have
you been taking your salt?
He goes, you know, I forgot
that the last two weeks.
So she fishes out the lab slip,
and his sodium level was 129.
Now that's below the
reference range for sodium.
That's a really
dangerous level of salt.
And if it drops much lower than
that, you can get seizures.
You can get arrhythmias
of the heart.
You can die from it.
Now his level was
up much higher that.
It was 141 about a
month before that.
This is a perfect
example of older people.
They can drop their salt
and water levels really
fast when they change things up.
So I looked at that, and I said
to him, you're salt deficient.
I think that's creating all
this hormonal response to it
and giving you the anxiety.
I said, let's give you a
hydration IV with salt water.
You start upping
your salt. I'd like
you to take a tablespoon of salt
a day for the next few days,
because he drank a lot of water.
And call me tomorrow and let
me know how you're doing.
I called him when I got
to work the next morning.
He said after the IV,
he felt much better,
took that salt
throughout the day.
All the anxiety was gone.
And his plan for me was just to
take more salt in-- that's all
I told him to do--
and to maintain it.
>>EDWARD: What is your opinion
on salt in the adrenal glands?
And does that affect the
amount of cortisol production?
How does that affect
the adrenal glands?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
the adrenal glands
release hormones to control
our salt intake in the body.
Conversely, salt helps--
adequate amounts of salt
will settle down
adrenal hyperactivity.
So there's no
question when people
get in a nervous,
anxious state, it's
called a sympathetic state.
The adrenal glands are releasing
cortisol and epinephrine
to help us through the state.
And it's a fight
or flight syndrome.
That's why I say take that
salt because it sometimes
can settle it down.
But better yet, maintain optimal
salt levels all the time.
And many times you won't end
up into that fight or flight
state.
And when you do, it
won't be quite as bad,
and you just take a
little bit of salt
to pull yourself out of it.
I've seen that occur many
times in my patients.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, how often
do you see adrenal burnout
or adrenal exhaustion?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
unfortunately,
in our busy, stressful
world, a lot of times.
And I always-- first thing I
go to with adrenal problems
is salt and make sure they
have adequate amounts of salt
because that takes the
pressure off the adrenals.
They don't have to
release so many hormones,
and they can settle down.
They have time to heal.
>>EDWARD: So when the adrenals--
when you start seeing
adrenal burnout
symptoms or adrenal
exhaustion, how
does that affect the hormone
production in the body?
Pregnenolone, estrogen,
and progesterone.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
what happens is the--
so pregnenolone and DHEA
are adrenal hormones.
And these help build tissue up.
And cortisol and
epinephrine help to--
they're catabolic hormones.
They help to break tissue down.
What happens when we're in
a chronic stressful state
is we just get these stressful
hormones being released,
and tissue gets broken
down much faster.
And we get an under production
of the hormones that help build
things back up in the body.
So we want to restore that
balance of getting the adrenals
settled down.
And there's no conventional
medicine that'll do that.
It's usually-- it's only natural
therapies that'll do that.
And it's doing the basics at
first-- drinking enough water,
getting in enough salt, getting
the hormonal system rebalanced,
correcting nutrient imbalances.
Vitamin C is really
important here.
The highest concentration
of vitamin C
is in the adrenal glands.
And we can't
manufacture vitamin C.
We don't have the enzyme to
convert glucose into vitamin C.
So we have to take it through
our food or supplement with it.
Our vitamin C levels in our food
have gone down over the years.
So it's tough.
And vitamin C is used up
in detoxification reactions
in the body.
So I think people need to
supplement with vitamin C
all times.
Around 3,000 to 5,000
milligrams a day
is enough to saturate the
red and white blood cells.
And the only side effects
with vitamin C is diarrhea.
So if they get that, they
just lower the dose down.
But I think vitamin C is
a really important thing
for adrenal stabilization,
just as salt and water is
part of that, too.
>>EDWARD: Have you
seen somebody that
might have been salt
deficient and you give them
the unrefined salt?
And let's say it balanced the
adrenals out for high blood
pressure.
Because I know
there's a correlation
between the adrenals
and high blood pressure.
>>BROWNSTEIN: So when the
adrenals get stressed out,
they release these hormones--
cortisol epinephrine
and things--
and other hormones that cause
the blood pressure to go up.
And you can give them
anti-hypertensive medications
that lower the blood pressure.
But you're not treating
the underlying cause.
The underlying cause is
adrenal hyperactivity.
And that can be
treated many times
with helping people slow their
lives down, meditate, exercise,
drinking water, salt, vitamin C,
a holistic approach to things.
>>EDWARD: So for
treatment of the adrenals,
you mentioned vitamin
C, mentioned iodine,
of course, multiple times,
water, salt. Anything else
that you would add
into that treatment
program for the adrenals?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So it depends
on what the problem is.
But I find adrenal
glandulars very
helpful from neonatal cows.
That's an old time
remedy that doctors
used to use when there
was a glandular problem.
They would use a
neonatal glandular.
And I use neonatal glandular
or neonatal adrenal glandulars
for my patients.
There's other supplements
that can be used for adrenals.
But generally, if
they do the basics,
they don't need a
lot of supplements.
The body's designed
to heal itself,
and the body's designed
to function optimally
if it has the optimal raw
materials that it needs.
>>EDWARD: That was
a great statement.
The body is designed.
We have a self-healing
mechanism.
We are designed to heal itself.
It's just that-- not
addressing the symptoms
but addressing the root cause.
>>BROWNSTEIN: We're not
designed to be sick.
We're not designed
to be fatigued.
We're not designed to
be anxious all the time.
We're designed to be healthy
at all stages of life.
>>EDWARD: Talk about
salt in the thyroid.
How does salt work
with the thyroid?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, it works
through the adrenal glands.
And the adrenal
glands and the thyroid
work together to maintain
optimal energy and balance.
And people can get problems
with the thyroid glands
from the adrenals, and
they can get problems
from their adrenals
from the thyroid gland.
Now sometimes that's
hard to figure out.
And you don't know which
is causing the problem.
And that's where I come into
play to try and figure it out.
And I don't want to treat a
patient with adrenal problems
with thyroid hormone
because that can make
that adrenal problem worse.
I want to help them fix the
adrenal problem first, then
treat them with thyroid hormone.
But that's where a
good holistic doctor
can work with the patient.
>>EDWARD: Does salt detoxify
anything else from the body?
I mean, you talked about
it helping detox bromine
and fluoride.
Anything else that
you've noticed?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Yes.
The detoxification
pathways are really
tied to enough
sodium in the body
because they're
all run by sodium.
And it's not only the
bromide and fluoride.
Salt, you need the sodium atom
to get iodine into the cells
and to get iodine to
work for detoxification.
All this stuff is
intertwined with one another.
We need optimal levels of
all the essential elements
in the body, and
salt is one of them.
Iodine's another one.
>>EDWARD: What you
think about salt baths?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I have patients
use salt baths all the time
for detoxification, for
muscle aches and pains.
And it's a gentle way to help
detox and help pull things out
of the body.
>>EDWARD: And what kind of salt
do you recommend for the baths?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Epsom salts,
the old tried and true remedy,
work.
And they work great
for wounds, to help
to pull debris out of wounds.
I have my patients use a
lot of Epsom salts, which
is very high in magnesium,
very high in sulfur.
>>EDWARD: So if I'm
watching the show
and I want to know if I
have a salt deficiency, what
would be some of the signs
that I might be able to notice
like runny nose or
anything that I might
be suffering from that may
indicate that I have a salt
deficiency?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, the key sign
that you have a salt deficiency
is if you get a leg
cramp or a foot cramp
or a cramp anywhere in the body.
You are salt efficient
till proven otherwise,
and you need more
salt in the body.
Another sign is if
you're dehydrated.
Now sometimes people don't
know they're dehydrated.
But if your skin is sunken
in, your tongue's dry,
you have ridges on your nails,
that's chronic dehydration.
You need salt and water.
You need the salt to
hold the water in,
but you need more water to
correct that dehydrated state.
>>EDWARD: Let's move on.
I know you also
use ozone therapy
as part of your holistic
treatment approach,
maybe not in all patients
but maybe in some.
And people hear all the time,
oh, ozone is bad for you.
Ozone, the ozone layer,
we have ozone in the air
that you're breathing today or
a high ozone alert sometimes.
What is the benefit of using
ozone in a holistic practice?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, ozone is O3.
We can contrast
that with O2, oxygen
that we're breathing right now.
O3 is when three oxygen
atoms combine to form ozone.
O2 is oxygen as we refer to it
that we're breathing right now.
Ozone is formed in
the atmosphere when
lightning and electrical
discharge comes across the sky
and combines three oxygen
atoms together into O3.
So after lightning and
a thunderstorm hits,
we get that smell in the
air, that clean smell.
That's an ozone smell.
So the best medical
device to detect
whether ozone's
being made or not
is right here on our bodies.
It's the human nose.
So ozone was first
discovered in the 1800s when
a doctor was running electrical
discharge over some water,
and he smelled something.
And he described
what he smelled.
And they figured out
a few years later
that was ozone is
what he was smelling.
So you can have
ozone manufactured
by running electrical
discharge over an oxygen flow.
So for doctors to
use ozone, they're
going to have an oxygen tank.
It can be hooked up to
a little machine where
electrical discharge is
run across the oxygen
as it's flowing through a tube.
And what comes on the other
side of that is ozone.
And ozone has been used
in medicine for close
to a hundred years.
And it was used in the United
States a hundred years ago.
And then when the
Flexner report came out--
I think it was in 1930s--
where the AMA was saying, we're
going to allow these therapies
and we're not going to allow
these therapies to be done
in the US, ozone was
specifically singled out
as a therapy not to allow,
even though there was really
no reason for that.
It was a safe therapy.
Doctors were using it wildly.
There were no reports
of problems with it.
Now the United States is
decades behind other countries
who have been using ozone.
Cuba uses it as their main
therapy for almost anything
because it's cheap.
They don't have enough
money to put everyone
on antibiotics who get sick.
So they use ozone to treat
a lot of their infections.
There's no bacteria,
virus, parasite, fungi
that's resistant to ozone.
Ozone can be used
for infections.
When you put ozone
in the human body,
it converts into O2 or
oxygen very quickly.
So it's a good way
to oxygenate tissues.
We know cancer cells don't
like oxygen environments.
They like to live in a
non-oxygen environment.
So if you can get ozone
around cancer cells,
that's one way as an
anti-cancer therapy.
I mean, we use ozone for
hundreds of things in the body.
It creates stem cell production.
It stimulates repair cells.
It helps people produce energy.
We think the human body
might produce ozone.
We're not quite sure of that.
But ozone also
stimulates the production
of hydrogen peroxide
in the body, which
we know every white blood cell
releases when it's in contact
with a foreign invader.
So you can enhance that whole
process with using ozone.
There are so many uses
of ozone in medicine
that I ended up writing a
book on that called "Ozone--
The Miracle Therapy."
>>EDWARD: How is
ozone administered?
What are the different ways to
administer ozone to somebody?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, you can
administer ozone topically
and put it on as oils on the
skin, ozonated olive oil.
You can administer ozone
through the ears, where
we put a stethoscope
on a patient
and hook the other end up
to an ozone machine, which
blows the gas through the ears.
You can administer ozone with
injections into the body.
You can do it IV.
There are a bunch of--
you can it rectally.
You can do it vaginally.
Many ways to get
ozone into the body.
We use it as a good helpful
therapy in our office.
>>EDWARD: Yeah.
Besides ozone, what are some
of the other favorite things
that you use for the body?
How do you determine
or how do you
create that holistic
treatment plan
for each individual patient?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, I create
it by starting off doing what
I was taught in medical school.
It's taking a history, listening
to patients, asking questions,
trying to get an idea
of where things are,
how they're functioning
and what's happening
and what their story is.
Then doing a physical exam and
seeing what I see on the body
and confirming or denying
what I think is going on.
Then ordering
laboratory tests to,
again, help me make
a firm diagnosis
or point me in a
different direction.
And then trying to put the
whole picture together.
And I don't think that I'm--
as we said before
in another show,
I'm not treating
a laboratory test.
I'm treating patients here.
So once you do that, then
you can try and figure out,
what does the body
need to right itself?
The human body was well designed
to function optimally even
into old age.
I think if we can help it get
rid of toxins that are in it,
help it supply the nutrients
that are deficient, and maybe
give it a little boost
occasionally with something
like ozone or B12 shots, that
people can really function well
and get their health back.
>>EDWARD: What have you
seen and how have you
seen patients transform
when you start
working on healing their
gut and then also healing
their liver in conjunction
with the thyroid
in your holistic health program?
>>BROWNSTEIN:
There's no question
people are not
going to be healthy
if their gut's not healthy.
They're not going to be healthy
if their thyroid's not healthy
and their liver's not healthy.
So again, doing the basics--
taking history, doing a physical
exam, ordering the lab tests,
putting it all together,
having them eat better,
having them drink water.
Oxy-Powder's been a great help
for patients for constipation.
My mother's on it, by the way.
But it doesn't
stand alone, and it
should be used as part of a
holistic treatment regimen.
And it doesn't stand
for doing the basics.
The basics are drinking
water, eating a clean diet,
getting enough salt
in, and taking iodine.
I think those are really the
basic things people can do.
And there's
definitely-- people need
to detox and need to clean out
things every once in a while
and especially in
our world we live in.
And some people have
overgrowth of bad gut bacteria
and bad yeast
overgrowths and things
like that that you can help
rebalance to a better health.
And then if they eat a good
diet and through the water
and the salt and the
iodine and so on,
they can maintain
it at that point.
And I think that's what a
holistic treatment regimen
should provide for people.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, I totally agree.
It's that full body approach.
How many people do you think
have sensitivity to gluten?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Oh, it's huge.
It's a huge amount.
We were talking about
that at breakfast today.
I would say the number one
sensitivity out there is dairy,
and number two is gluten.
And I would estimate over
80% for both of them.
But dairy seems to trump
gluten as a bigger problem.
And I think it's the way
we're handling these foods.
There's something wrong because
we didn't have all this problem
50 years ago.
This problem is now.
So either there's something
wrong with the plants
as regard to gluten
or perhaps it's
the glyphosate or
the Roundup they're
putting on the plants that's
somehow reacting to us
and causing us gluten problems.
Or it's the
genetically bred plants
that produce more
gluten that has just
overwhelmed our system.
In regards to
cow's milk, I think
it's just the super
pasteurization of milk
has totally changed
the protein structure,
and our bodies can't handle it.
And I check antibody levels for
these on every new patient that
comes in.
I'm amazed at how many people
have sensitivities to these.
It's one of the
most common things
I do is tell people to
avoid gluten and dairy.
And they really
need to avoid it.
They're producing
too much inflammation
when they eat that stuff.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, there's
blood in dairy products.
There's vaccine residue.
There's antibiotic
residue in milk.
And then what are
the cows eating?
They're eating
genetically modified food.
So I mean, if you take all of
that and you put it in the cow,
what do you expect going
to come out of the cow?
I mean, it's just--
>>BROWNSTEIN: And the
cows are stressed out,
and the cows have a
lot of stress hormones.
That's ending up in the milk.
And the milk is dirty.
That's why they have to super
pasteurized it because they're
not processing it correctly.
They used to process that
milk with iodine right
from the start.
And the government has
lowered the amount of iodine
they can put in the milk, and
now it's all contaminated.
So they have to
superheat it, which
changes the protein
structure, which makes it
a bad substance for our bodies.
So it's just-- we have
a big mess on our hands.
And it goes back to the point of
eating organically, supporting
organic farmers, eating
food without pesticides,
shop appropriately, and
use our dollars wisely
so we can make a
change with things.
>>EDWARD: One more time I'd
like to mention your book.
Dr. Brownstein's book,
"Salt Your Way to Health."
Highly recommend you
go get this book.
Dr. Brownstein, what can other
people do to find out more,
read more of your information?
Where can they go to study
more of your research?
>>BROWNSTEIN: They can go to my
website, www.drbrownstein.com.
I have 15 books there.
And all I write
about is what works.
And I see it work
in my practice,
and I get excited about it.
And I try to educate
people so that they
can make a better
choice and they
can make appropriate choices.
And they don't have to be
railroaded into taking drugs
that they don't need.
>>EDWARD: Thank you so much
for coming on the show today.
We really appreciate all
of your knowledge, all
your commitments,
everything that you've
done to educate all of
us and educate the world.
Thank you.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Thank you.
>>EDWARD: I also want to thank
Dr. Brownstein for walking us
through this incredible
four part series on iodine.
Dr. Brownstein has written
several books on this topic.
Read his books.
Go to his website,
drbrownstein.com.
Educate yourself, and change
your life and the lives
of your loved ones forever.
I'm Dr. Ed Group.
Thank you for joining us on
this special edition of "Healing
Matrix."
[SOFT MUSIC]
[HEART THUMPING]